Documentation for new OpenTherm component (#3800)
OttoWinter/esphomedocs: components/opentherm.rst

Reviewer: Please add the standard `See Also` block at the bottom of the page with at least a link to the header files and the ghedit link.

Reviewer 2: Once this is done, this has my 👍🏻

Author: Done!

OpenTherm
=========

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up OpenTherm bridge in ESPHome.
    :image: ../components/images/opentherm-shield.png
    :keywords: OpenTherm

> OpenTherm (OT) is a standard communications protocol used in central heating systems for the communication between a central heating appliances and a thermostatic controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenTherm (OT) is a standard communications protocol used in central heating systems for the communication between central heating appliances and a thermostatic controller.
```

As a standard, OpenTherm is independent of any single manufacturer. A controller from manufacturer A can in principle be used to control a boiler from manufacturer B.

Since OpenTherm doesn't operate in a standard voltage range, special hardware is required. You can choose from several ready-made adapters or roll your own:

- `DIYLESS Master OpenTherm Shield <https://diyless.com/product/master-opentherm-shield>`__
- `Ihor Melnyk's OpenTherm Adapter <http://ihormelnyk.com/opentherm_adapter>`__
- `Jiří Praus' OpenTherm Gateway Arduino Shield <https://www.tindie.com/products/jiripraus/opentherm-gateway-arduino-shield/>`__ .

.. figure:: images/opentherm-shield.png
    :align: center
    :width: 50.0%

    DIYLESS Master OpenTherm Shield.

.. note::

>     This component acts only as an OpenTherm master (i.e. a thermostat or controller) and not as a slave or gateway. You can no longer use your existing thermostat if you control your boiler through ESPHome with this component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This component acts only as an OpenTherm master (for example, a thermostat or controller) and not as a slave or gateway. Your existing thermostat is not usable while you use ESPHome with this component to control your boiler.
```

Quick glossary
--------------

- CH: Central Heating
- DHW: Domestic Hot Water

Hub
---

> First of all you need to define the OpenTherm hub in your configuration. Note that most OpenTherm adapters label ``in`` and ``out`` pins relative to themselves, and this component labels its ``in`` and ``out`` pins relative to ESP board. So usually your bridge's ``in`` pin becomes hub's ``out`` pin and vice versa.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you need to define the OpenTherm hub in your configuration. Note that most OpenTherm adapters label ``in`` and ``out`` pins relative to themselves; this component labels its ``in`` and ``out`` pins relative to the microcontroller ESPHome runs on. As such, your bridge's ``in`` pin becomes the hub's ``out`` pin and vice-versa.
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    opentherm:

>       in_pin: 4
>       out_pin: 5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      in_pin: GPIOXX
      out_pin: GPIOXX
```

Configuration variables:
************************

- **in_pin** (**Required**, number): The pin of the OpenTherm hardware bridge which is usually labeled ``out`` on the board.
- **out_pin** (**Required**, number): The pin of the OpenTherm hardware bridge which is usually labeled ``in`` on the board.
- **sync_mode** (**Optional**, boolean, default **false**): Synchronous communication mode prevents other components from disabling interrupts while we are talking to the boiler. Enable if you experience a lot of random intermittent invalid response errors (very likely to happen while using Dallas temperature sensors).
- **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.  Required if you have multiple busses.

Note abut sync mode
*******************

> By default this component adheres to ESPHome recommendations and doesn't block the loop while communicating with the boiler. Unfortunately, some other components (like Dallas temperature sensors) don't play well with this behaviour, and may cause a lot of lost frames and protocol warnings from OpenTherm. Since OpenTherm is resilient by design and transmits its messages in a constant loop, these dropped frames don't really matter. But if you want to decrease the number of protocol warnings in your logs, you can enable ``sync_mode``, which blocks ESPHome loop until a single conversation with the boiler is complete. This can greatly reduce the number of dropped frames, but usually doesn't eliminate them entirely. You also need to add a logging directive to your config, so that ESPHome doesn't complain about a single component hogging the loop for too long:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The use of some components (like Dallas temperature sensors) may result in lost frames and protocol warnings from OpenTherm. Since OpenTherm is resilient by design and transmits its messages in a constant loop, these dropped frames don't usually cause any problems. Still, if you want to decrease the number of protocol warnings in your logs, you can enable ``sync_mode`` which will block ESPHome's main application loop until a single conversation with the boiler is complete. This can greatly reduce the number of dropped frames, but usually won't eliminate them entirely. With ``sync_mode`` enabled, in some cases, ESPHome's main application loop may be blocked for longer than is recommended, resulting in warnings in the logs. If this bothers you, you can adjust ESPHome's log level by adding the following to your configuration:
```

Numerical input
***************

There are three ways to set an input value:

- As an input sensor, defined in the hub configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

    opentherm:
      t_set: setpoint_sensor

    sensor:
      - platform: homeassistant
        id: setpoint_sensor
        entity_id: sensor.boiler_setpoint

This can be useful if you have an external thermostat-like device that provides the setpoint as a sensor.

- As a number:

.. code-block:: yaml

    number:
      - platform: opentherm
        t_set:
          name: Boiler Setpoint

This is useful if you want full control over your boiler and want to manually set all values.

- As an output:

.. code-block:: yaml

    output:
      - platform: opentherm
      t_set:
        id: setpoint

This is especially useful in combination with the PID Climate component:

.. code-block:: yaml

    climate:
      - platform: pid
      heat_output: setpoint

>       # ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        heat_output: setpoint
        # ...
```

- ``max_value`` (float): The maximum value. For a number this is the maximum value you are allowed to input. For an output this is the number that will be sent to the boiler when the output is at 100%.
- ``auto_max_value`` (boolean): Automatically configure the maximum value to a value reported by the boiler. Not available for all inputs.
- ``auto_min_value`` (boolean): Automatically configure the minimum value to a value reported by the boiler. Not available for all inputs.

The following inputs are available:

- ``t_set``: Control setpoint: temperature setpoint for the boiler's supply water (°C)
- ``t_set_ch2``: Control setpoint 2: temperature setpoint for the boiler's supply water on the second heating circuit (°C)
- ``cooling_control``: Cooling control signal (%)
- ``t_dhw_set``: Domestic hot water temperature setpoint (°C)
- ``max_t_set``: Maximum allowable CH water setpoint (°C)
- ``t_room_set``: Current room temperature setpoint (informational) (°C)
- ``t_room_set_ch2``: Current room temperature setpoint on CH2 (informational) (°C)
- ``t_room``: Current sensed room temperature (informational) (°C)

Switch
******

> For five status codes, switches are available to toggle them manually. The same values can be set in the hub configuration, like so:
> 
> .. code-block:: yaml
> 
>     opentherm:
>       ch_enable: true
>       dhw_enable: true
> 
> This can be used to set the value without the need for a switch if you'd never want to toggle it after the initial configuration.
> The default values for these configuration options are listed below.
> 
> For enabling of central heating and cooling, the enable-flag is only sent to the boiler if the following conditions are met:
> - the flag is set to true in the hub configuration,
> - the switch is on, if it is configured,
> - the setpoint or cooling control value is not 0, if it is configured.
> 
> For domestic hot water and outside temperature compensation, only the first two conditions are necessary.
> 
> The last point ensures that central heating is not enabled if no heating is requested as indicated by a setpoint of 0. If you use a number as the setpoint input and use a minimum value higher than 0, you NEED to use the ch_enable switch to turn off your central heating. In that case the flag will be set to true in the hub configuration, and setpoint is always larger than 0, so including a switch is the only way you can turn off central heating. (This also holds for cooling and CH2.)
> 
> The following switches are available:
> 
> - ``ch_enable``: Central Heating enabled
> - ``dhw_enable``: Domestic Hot Water enabled
> - ``cooling_enable``: Cooling enabled
> - ``otc_active``: Outside temperature compensation active
> - ``ch2_active``: Central Heating 2 active

Reviewer 2: The section heading is `switches`, but then the first thing talked about is how to not use the switches. 😅

I think I would reorganize this section like so:

```suggestion

Switches are available to allow manual toggling of any of the following five status codes:

- ``ch_enable``: Central Heating enabled
- ``dhw_enable``: Domestic Hot Water enabled
- ``cooling_enable``: Cooling enabled
- ``otc_active``: Outside temperature compensation active
- ``ch2_active``: Central Heating 2 active

If you do not wish to have switches, the same values can be permanently set in the hub configuration, like so:

.. code-block:: yaml

    opentherm:
      ch_enable: true
      dhw_enable: true

This is useful when you'd never want to toggle it after the initial configuration.

The default values for these configuration variables are listed below.

To enable central heating and cooling, the flag is only sent to the boiler if the following conditions are met:

- the flag is set to true in the hub configuration,
- the switch is on (if configured),
- the setpoint or cooling control value is not 0 (if configured)

For domestic hot water and outside temperature compensation, only the first two conditions are necessary.

The last point ensures that central heating is not enabled if no heating is requested as indicated by a setpoint of 0. If you use a number as the setpoint input and use a minimum value higher than 0, you **must** use the ``ch_enable`` switch to turn off your central heating. In such a case, the flag will be set to true in the hub configuration and the setpoint is always larger than 0, so including a switch is the only way you can turn off central heating. (This also holds for cooling and CH2.)
```

- ``ch_pump_starts``: Number of starts CH pump
- ``dhw_pump_valve_starts``: Number of starts DHW pump/valve
- ``dhw_burner_starts``: Number of starts burner during DHW mode
- ``burner_operation_hours``: Number of hours that burner is in operation
- ``ch_pump_operation_hours``: Number of hours that CH pump has been running
- ``dhw_pump_valve_operation_hours``: Number of hours that DHW pump has been running or DHW valve has been opened
- ``dhw_burner_operation_hours``: Number of hours that burner is in operation during DHW mode
- ``t_dhw_set_ub``: Upper bound for adjustment of DHW setpoint (°C)
- ``t_dhw_set_lb``: Lower bound for adjustment of DHW setpoint (°C)
- ``max_t_set_ub``: Upper bound for adjustment of max CH setpoint (°C)
- ``max_t_set_lb``: Lower bound for adjustment of max CH setpoint (°C)
- ``t_dhw_set``: Domestic hot water temperature setpoint (°C)
- ``max_t_set``: Maximum allowable CH water setpoint (°C)

Examples
--------

Minimal example with numeric input
**********************************

.. code-block:: yaml

    # An extremely minimal configuration which only enables you to set the boiler's
    # water temperature setpoint as a number.

>     esphome:
>       name: thermostat-number-minimal
> 
>     esp8266:
>       board: d1_mini
> 
>     logger:
> 
>     api:
>     ota:
>     wifi:
>       ap:
>         ssid: "Thermostat"
>         password: "MySecretThemostat"
> 

Reviewer 2: These can be omitted, they're not really relevant to the example.

```suggestion
```

    opentherm:

>       in_pin: 21
>       out_pin: 26

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      in_pin: GPIOXX
      out_pin: GPIOXX
```

    number:
      - platform: opentherm
        t_set:
          name: "Boiler Control setpoint"

.. _thermostat-pid-basic:

Basic PID thermostat
********************

.. code-block:: yaml

    # A basic thremostat for a boiler with a single central heating circuit and
    # domestic hot water. It reports the flame, CH and DHW status, similar to what
    # you would expect to see on a thermostat and also reports the internal boiler
    # temperatures and the current modulation level. The temperature is regulated
    # through a PID Climate controller and the current room temperature is retrieved
    # from a sensor in Home Asisstant.

    # This configuration should meet most needs and is the recommended starting
    # point if you just want a thermostat with an external temperature sensor.

>     esphome:
>       name: thermostat-pid-basic
> 
>     esp8266:
>       board: d1_mini
> 
>     logger:
> 
>     api:
>     ota:
>     wifi:
>       ap:
>         ssid: "Thermostat"
>         password: "MySecretThemostat"
> 

Reviewer 2: As above
```suggestion
```

    opentherm:

>       in_pin: 21
>       out_pin: 26

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      in_pin: GPIOXX
      out_pin: GPIOXX
```
